I think the role that I have helped bring to this space is bringing people
together and so I think through my work at Posit I saw that so many of these
pharmaceutical companies just wanted to get together they wanted to talk and
they were coming to me to say can you make these introductions so starting R
and Pharma was really the spark that brought a lot of the pharmaceutical
companies together and there for the first time the R Validation Hub had
their hangout you know ideas around the Pharmaverse were sparked out of the idea
that these pharmaceutical companies had specific workflows and code that they
wanted to share so it's been amazing to really just see the life that has come
out of the R and Pharma conference there was very much this sense and momentum
that a new horizon was coming out for open source to change the landscape and
lead to a lot of innovations for clinical trials and so a lot of groups
that had implemented R for research or for Shiny had now started saying can we
use this in addition for our late-stage clinical trials work. I could certainly
feel that there was a change coming to the way that clinical trials were
conducted in bringing open source to that ecosystem but I knew that it was
going to take some time and there was going to be a decent amount of change
management that would have to take place for that to work. Part of the popularity
of R in the drug development space especially late-stage clinical trials
is because there was a legacy stat programming language that people had
used and so migrating from that language to R was a very easy transition for a
lot of organizations because R is an open source language built for
statistical computing as well as that legacy code and programming tool was
also built for stats programming so I think the transition from that previous
tool to R is natural because languages like Python are more general purpose
programming languages and so I think that has led to a lot of the adoption in
the space as well as Shiny I would say. A lot of pharmaceutical companies use our
professional software for their clinical trials and that typically consists of
Posit team and Posit team is made up of three different products there's a
Posit workbench which is the development environment literally it's called a
development environment because it's where people are going to go in and do
their programming. There they create software and artifacts and content and
Shiny apps and workflows and then they move that into production into our
second product which is called Posit Connect that's the production and
deployment platform that we host and maintain and then the back-end what's
surfacing out the production and oftentimes validated packages for both
of those environments is the Posit package manager and so that's feeding
packages for reproducibility into the development side as well as feeding
packages into the production side. Pharmaceutical companies care a lot
about Posit package manager because there is this great desire to own and
manage the validation and oftentimes what's referred to as qualification of
packages and so a lot of work goes internally at pharmaceutical companies
to say these are the core packages typically around a hundred to two or
three hundred or so packages that this is what people are going to use for
clinical trials so package manager specifically is critical for clinical
development because it makes the source of where their package is coming from
locked down and approved for the work internally at the company. Yeah there's a
lot of use cases and companies and pharmaceutical organizations using our
professional tools. Recently this was highlighted by Satish Murthy in the data
science hangout that they use Posit package manager for surfacing and
managing the source of their validated packages that they bring out. That's one
of the most key things for organizations is to make sure the source of the
packages coming into the workflows is validated and the right packages. In
addition to that Merck also had a webinar with us that highlighted their
use of package manager. There's lots of other organizations that have highlighted
the use of Posit Connect for where they manage and host their Shiny
applications. For example Roche and Genentech in their webinar a couple
months ago highlighted that they have an entire framework that they've built in
house around Shiny and they host their Shiny apps there with Posit Connect. It's
going to be interesting to see how the future plays out with introductions to
new tooling like Python and leading that into AI and how some of that could
change some of the clinical trials. I don't think that's going to happen right
away but we see this very big inclusive and interoperable future for drug
development.